# Transcript
> My Journey with the world of open source

- Talk link: [Vimeo](https://vimeo.com/album/3253406/video/119355618)
- Slides link: [Speakerdeck](https://speakerdeck.com/shrayasr/my-journey-with-the-world-of-open-source)

---

`[Slide 1]`

Hi. 

`[Slide 2]`

My name is Shrayas, I work in a company called Logic Soft 

`[Slide 3]`

And today I am going to try to talk about my journey with the world of open
source.  I'm going to try and tell you all the way from where I think I
started, from where it makes sense and try and tell you the things that I, in
retrospect I learnt by working with open source

`[Slide 4]`

So I think it all started with 2 talks that I watched on youtube. One of them a
friend recommended to me and its where 

`[Slide 5]`

Linus Torvalds talks about Git, the version control system. He talks about it
at Google. I didn't understand too much at that point in time but it got me
curious as to what it was and the idea of Distributed version control got me
interested.

So I started looking up more videos to learn more about Git and I landed on
this.

`[Slide 6]`

So basically that is Tom Presten Werner, one of the founders of Github. He and
2 other founders spoke about Git, Github and Social Coding. At that point in
time I had no idea what the word open source meant so the idea of Social coding
made a lot of sense to me because I thought that was a really nice way to do
software. The whole being able to be anywhere in the world and still be able to
collaborate on something is something I found really interesting. 

Thought I didn't know the word Open Source at that point in time, the term
Social coding struck a bell somewhere.

So this was all the way back

`[Slide 7]`

In 2008 and 2009 and quite honestly I didn't understand about whatever I heard
and whatever I saw in those talks but what it did was

`[Slide 8]`

It made me curious and this was, in retrospect something that was really
important because it put me down a nice track which I think brought me to here
and I think that is pretty cool. 

`[Slide 9]`

So let us jump to 2012. More specifically

`[Slide 10]`

The 18th of March, 2012. 2 cool things happened on this day. 

`[Slide 11]`

One, There was an India V/S Pakistan match at Dhaka. We won by about 5 wickets
but the thing here is that as in any India V/S Pakistan match the whole house
is filled with "whats the score", "whats the score" for every second. So my mom
was watching something on the TV and my cousin who was visiting me at that
point in time kept asking me the score and after a point of time switching to
cricinfo got really irritating. Which is when the 2nd cool thing happened on
this day and that is that

`[Slide 12]`

Wrote Score. 

So Score is basically a Shell script that goes to the match page of espn
cricinfo and gets the page and prints whatever is in the title tag. Most of the
credit here goes to them because they do such a cool job of putting the score
in the title tag. So I put it in a little watch script and left it on the side
and told him to see the score whenever he wanted it. 

So I put this on HN and got 40 upvotes and 16 stars on GitHub. 16 stars at that
point in time was something that was really cool, especially for a first
project.  And this really got me motivated and I ended up doing quite a lot of
things in that year - majorly Shell scripts because that is what I was learning
then.

But the 1 important learning here is that

`[Slide 13]`

It is important that you scratch your itch. If you look back, you will see that
some of the greatest projects and products that exist right now started because
either one developer or a group of developers got irritated with something and
said "I'm going to solve this for myself". I think a deep connection with the
problem helps you to go that extra mile in order to solve it and thats what
solving a problem takes - It takes you full dedication. 

`[Slide 14]`

The next thing came when I found this fellow. He is called Zach Holman and he
works for Github and when I was reading through his blog posts I found this
talk

`[Slide 15]` 

Automating Inefficiencies in which he talks about how he wrote a bunch of
scripts in order to automate the certain mundane tasks in his daily life.

`[Slide 16]`

So he wrote this thing called BOOM. And according to him in that it is supposed
to be pronounced B O O M, But whatever :) So I got so obsessed with his blogs
and the way he used to do things so I wrote this

`[Slide 17]`

Uh, Basically the clone of that project in the Shell. 

`[Slide 18]`

And the thing is, even to this day it grossly remains unfinished as with most
of my Side Projects but I learnt quite a bit of things here and then the thing
is that

`[Slide 19]`

It is important that you look up to someone. You should have a person that you
want to be like. There is really nothing wrong in wanting to be like someone
because you are adding and following their experience along with yours and that
is really cool and I think to be quite honest these slides that I've made is
something that I've learnt from His slides. I think he is one of the best
people to make slides in the world right now. I am not exaggerating at all. If
you take a look at his slides and the way he presents is absolutely insane. So
this is basically kind of a homage to him.

`[Slide 20]`

So, Moving forward to 2013.. 

`[Slide 21]`

This is the time that I learnt about Reddit. Who here doesn't know reddit?

Ok so, you should check out reddit.com because it is an absolutely amazing
place.  But I give you a warning that it will basically waste months of your
life and it'll put back your productivity that much but it is still cool thing
to do. 

`[Slide 22]`

So along with this I learnt about the Python Programming language and I started
experimenting with it so naturally I ended up at this project called 

`[Slide 23]`

PRAW. PRAW is an python wrapper around the Reddit API so basically you can
interact with reddit in a very pythonic fashion. 

So A few days after experimenting with this project, 

`[Slide 24]`

I found this thing on HN where Read The Docs announced a new theme. RTD is
basically a platform that most python projects use to host their documentation. 

So when I was using PRAW, I kind of had a little bit of problems with browsing
the documentation like from the mobile and it wasn't too nice so I thought that
this made sense and 

`[Slide 25]`

I sent them a Pull request saying here is a bunch of code in order to move the
documentation to the new thing and what happened after this actually quite
honestly leaves me baffled to this day and I'll tell you why.

`[Slide 26]`

Believe it or not, this is the amount of conversation that we had on that Pull
Request and you'll see why

`[Slide 27]`

There were points that were made by a guy that said there are a certain
percentage of people visiting it from the mobile so its a good change to make
and another guy says it makes sense because it looks really cool on small
screens and they gave me a bunch of tips on how to make the code to the
standard of what they currently had. 

But the reason I'm baffled is not that. The reason I'm baffled is because of
this

`[Slide 28]`

This is the entire diff of the pull request that I sent. I kid you not. I
changed the word Nature to Default and I added one line of comment. So this is
all I sent. This is really really cool because it shows you the amount of
dedication that goes into an open source project and the amount of time that
people take out in order to make sure that it fits the standards and things
like that I think this really left me in a humbled state. 

So

`[Slide 29]`

Don't hesitate! I mean it doesn't matter. I wasn't, I don't think I was a great
programmer back then and I don't think I am one now but I think I was tonnes
bad then so don't hesitate. 

If you think you can make a difference to some particular project at some point
in time, you should just do it. It doesn't matter. The important thing here is
like what our parents used to say to make us feel nice when we're running a
race \- "No no don't worry, its not about winning, its about participating" :)
Its basically like that and even the smallest amount of effort will make an
impact in an open source project.

Right now, If you actually look up the praw documentation. It is in the new
theme so it kinda feels nice that I had some part to play in that. 

`[Slide 30]`

Moving forward to 2014, I think another 2 important things happened and first
is that 

`[Slide 31]`

I watched this movie - It is called Revolution OS. It talks about the GNU/Linux
and Free Software Foundation movement. About how Richard Stallman believes in
what he does and the whole GNU project and about Eric S Raymond and moreso the
origins of the word "Open Source". I think that this is something that all of
you should watch. It is really really good.

`[Slide 32]`

The second thing is about a book called "The cathedral and the bazaar" written
by Eric S Raymond. So he talks about the open source model in order to build
this project of his called Fetchmail and I think Fetchmail is basically what
gets us all of our mails and I think without him we'd be able to get our mails
right now. One of the editions is just about 80 page and I think that it is a
worth read to understand the power of collaborating in an open source fashion

`[Slide 33]`

Apart from that I took it up on myself to contribute to as many projects as
possible so these are some. One of the cool things I did was that I contributed
to one of the projects of Github and again it was 5 characters of change - You
can look up the PR. But its a nice feeling that I know I solved one of their
bugs :)

`[Slide 34]`

So I just took it upon myself to want to contribute to as many projects as
possible and try to read the documentation and read the source as much as I can
and I think that I did a decent job at it. 

So basically, 

`[Slide 35]`

Start small. You're not going to be able to take an Open Source project, dive
into it and learn everything about it. Its just not possible. You need to start
somewhere. Take a small piece of code and try to understand it and see if there
is a problem around it and try to fix it for them. If it isn't possible, take a
bigger chunk and repeat the process. 

You'll only learn it in steps. There is really no quick and dirty shortcut to
mastering these things. I think it is like Mathematics - You really need to sit
down with a pen and a paper and its just consistent effort over a period of
time and I don't think there is any other better way to do it.

And this applies in general to Programming as well. You just need to put in
that amount of effort over that period of time in order to get better. 

But you should also dream big and think that one day I'll be able to contribute
to something great or write something great myself. So which is another
important thing

`[Slide 36]`

So just to recap

`[Slide 37]`

Over the course of 2008 to 2014, 

`[Slide 38]`

I learnt that it is important that you Scratch your itch and believe in
something that you do and 

`[Slide 39]`

It is really ok to look up to someone - It is important that you do, in fact.

`[Slide 40]`

Don't hesitate when you think you can contribute to a project - Please go ahead
and do it. 

`[Slide 41]`

And always start small but keep your dreams big

So

`[Slide 42]`

Thats really been my journey with the world of open source 

`[Slide 43]`

Thanks.
